slavery has its place in museums I
certainly think it's a worthwhile and
important thing to take taxpayers
dollars and to create a museum about
slavery explain to people what was so
terrible about slavery how it worked
examine the past even preserve artifacts
related to that slavery and in the same
sense it would be a wonderful thing if
there were a museum in downtown Paris to
the darkness of the Dark Ages the
notre-dame Cathedral in downtown Paris
that's not its function it's not asking
those questions and to pretend that it
is would be like confusing a museum
about the history of slavery with an
actual ongoing slave trading market you
probably think that any progressive
right minded person believes in the
separation of church and state but then
that once religion is separate that it
just continues in perpetuity unmolested
uncontrolled by the Constitution or
government with an intervention and that
in this sense the notre-dame Cathedral
and a hundred other cathedrals should go
on taking up a big part of the landscape
a big part of the geography of Paris and
every city in France for ever and ever
and ever and that they should take up a
big part of the taxpayers dollars for
ever and ever and ever so that the gold
is always shining on that reliquary so
that everything is maintaining restored
if you ever want positive cultural
change if you ever want to move past the
legacy of the Dark Ages in Europe then
you have to believe in the government
stepping in at some point and putting an
end to exactly what the notre-dame
cathedral represents and exactly what it
really is and it's terrifying for me to
see Emmanuel macron standing up without
a word of criticism from anyone not from
the professional internet atheists not
from the left-wing not from the right
wing for him to stand up and say no
everything should be rebuilt so that the
notre-dame cathedral can remain a symbol
of France
forever and ever and ever that that's
not the future of France that's not the
president of France and that's not even
the history of France since you wrote
your constitution or since you wrote
your first constitution in the French
Revolution the president of the French
Republic Emmanuel macron has made public
commitment after public commitment to
rebuilding the notre-dame Cathedral a
Cathedral that recently burnt down in
the middle of Paris and it's surprising
to me that nobody is questioning the
constitutionality of this commitment
nobody is questioning the moral or
political significance of it in 2019
I had a quotation up from my father
recently in which my father reflected
time of itself changes nothing it is
people people in their actions people in
their deeds that make history time of
itself does nothing at all I'm somewhat
horrified by the passive attitude of
members of my generation that the future
will come about of itself that the
future itself will bring enlightenment
that all of these terrible things from
the medieval past whether in Islam
recently resurgent in Isis the Islamic
state Taliban so forth whether it's the
medieval past of Islam or the medieval
past of Catholicism and Christianity
that those things will fade away simply
because the number on the calendar gets
higher every year and yes
I'm intensely aware of the irony that
even the numbering of the years in our
society is itself a memorial and a
monument to Jesus Christ
Emmanuel macron the president of French
Republic has committed his nation in as
much as his power to do so or in as much
as he can make the rhetorical claim he's
committed the nation to rebuilding the
notre-dame Cathedral
because it's a monument to France to
what France isn't and should be it's
terrifying for me to imagine that people
believe in it's much more likely that
people simply have this passive attitude
that if the taxpayers pour their money
into this monument into this memorial to
this religion that as the centuries go
by somehow someone else will do the work
of creating the secular society that the
French Constitution promised them that
we we don't have to bother ourselves
about making that change I often find
myself saying to people this is this is
2019 you know if we're not living in the
future who is if we're not committed to
make these changes here and now what are
we gonna do wait centuries and centuries
for some other generation to be
enlightened enough committed enough
motivated enough to make that change at
what point do we draw the line and say
making excuses for the ignorance that
the Dark Ages is over now slavery has
its place in museums I certainly think
it's a worthwhile and important thing to
take taxpayers dollars and to create a
museum about slavery explain to people
what was so terrible about slavery how
it worked
examine the past even preserve artifacts
related to that slavery and in the same
sense it would be a wonderful thing if
there were a museum in downtown Paris to
the darkness of the dark ages explain to
you what was so terrible about the
Catholic Church during the fetal period
of our history how it held us back from
making progress for centuries and
centuries the bizarre and perverse ways
in which that faith wore
our perception of reality and made
unbelievably cruel and heinous acts seem
normal for centuries that people were
literally boiled to death in cauldrons
in downtown cities that people were
tortured publicly and broken on the
wheel for crimes that today are
considered trivial they might not even
pay a fine I remember one case of a
young man being broken on the wheel for
having stolen a stack of blank paper and
in a dynamic way it absolutely is linked
to to the faith of Christianity the same
faith where their hero their martyr
Jesus Christ was himself executed by
capital punishment nevertheless became a
social philosophy and legal system and
society fixated on torturing people the
death torturing confessions to people
gave a punishment the way in which this
faith that finds its seed in the New
Testament and the Bible grew into a vine
that suffocated all the creativity out
of society that people were persecuted
and interrogated for heresy for free
thinking of any kind for questioning
church doctrine of any kind the way in
which the most absurd beliefs were
inculcated into people as children and
then enforced through very real violence
for centuries and centuries that's
that's a story that a museum has to tell
that is not the story that the cathedral
Notre Dame tells at downtown Paris the
cathedral notes will damned if you go to
visit it will not present to you the
history of how absurd it is how telling
it is that people once once believed
that this piece of wood this piece of
wood in a in a golden reliquary that
this piece of wood was a fragment of the
one true cross that people used to come
on pilgrimages for what could only be
called a hoax even if you were a true
believing Christian today in 2019 but
you were a somewhat rational Christian
you would have to recognize that the
cult of the relic
weary of pretending that this piece of
wood was actually the wood of the cross
that a so-called historical Jesus was
nailed to him where the wood actually
came from and so and so forth the story
behind how they found this and the
second put in the church though the real
history there it's sickening it's
shameful I think of anything you'd feel
more ashamed if you were a true
believing Christian and you had to look
at that history and look at that legacy
and feel that it that it's your history
that it's that it's your legacy all
right the notre-dame Cathedral in
downtown Paris that's not its function
it's not asking those questions and to
pretend that it is would be like
confusing a museum about the history of
slavery with an actual ongoing slave
trading market okay the agenda of the
Catholic Church and the purpose of that
institution with its multi-million
dollar budget in the middle of downtown
Paris is not to bring about
enlightenment and the secular society
that the French Revolution and the
French Constitution are committed to it
is not clear to me to what extent
Emmanuel macron really knowingly and
consciously and intentionally wants to
throw away the separation of church and
state that they have in France and
there's a very complex dance for how
public funds get used to restore
religious temples in France given their
constitutional history going back to the
French Revolution of 1789 and Napoleon
and that whole story that there is
really supposed to be a secular
government that is neither involved in
building and beautifying and maintaining
French churches nor mosques nor Hindu
temples nor any other any other
religions structure there they're
supposed to be committed to this there's
a broader problem here my girlfriend
asked me a couple of weeks ago what I
thought in principle about the question
of governments taking away land from
private landowners
and I told her that time this is
something my own thinking is had to
mature about over the years growing up
in Canada it's very easy to imagine that
any time the state steps over the line
and takes away private property
ownership from people that the state is
doing a horrendous and criminal thing
our history in Canada the main memory we
have the main idea we have associated
with the government taking away people's
land is of course the government
depriving indigenous people of their
land today in Ontario it's not the case
that white people pay rent to a Cree or
a jib way landowner it's not native
people who are the wealthy landowners
today in Montreal you're not going to
hear white people complaining that they
have a mohawk landlord that's not what
happened in our country the land was
taken away from the people who owned it
and it of course it changed the whole as
to the country in various places it was
cultural genocide or outright genocide
history unfolds dead in Hawaii it's
actually a much more recent history
that's very well documented of exactly
how the American government decided to
take away land from indigenous people of
Hawaii and that's why it's very rare to
have people in Hawaii tell you oh that
they're you know the native people are
becoming rich that's the indigenous
people are becoming multimillionaires
out of the urbanization and tourism
development in Hawaii okay so that's our
history with very negative associations
with the concept of government
intervening on private property on land
ownership okay likewise probably you
watching this video wherever you are if
you just think about government
intervening and religion it probably has
a negative connotations you probably
think that any progressive right minded
person believes in the separation of
church and state but then that once
religion is separate that it just
continues in perpetuity unmolested
uncontrolled by the Constitution or
government with an intervention and that
in this sense the notre-dame Cathedral
and a hundred other cathedrals should go
on taking up a big part of the landscape
a big part of the geography of Paris and
every city in France forever and ever
and ever and that they should take up a
big part of the taxpayers dollars
forever ever
so that the gold is always shining on
that reliquary so that everything is
maintaining restored and look guys
things burn down this isn't it's gonna
happen once today it's the Notre Dame
Cathedral a couple years ago one of the
Queen's palaces Queen's Ballroom in
England burned Queen of England there
was this question how many millions of
dollars should be put into restoring
this and is it worth it cultural
heritage maintaining cultural heritage
forever and ever doesn't mean just one
fire or just one repair okay the budget
goes on forever and ever but the problem
is if you believe in the principle but
the government should never take land
away from landowners that means that you
believe in aristocracy and that
aristocracy should go on forever and
ever in all these countries in France
Germany and so on they have a history of
aristocrats and if the land wasn't taken
away from aristocrats and given to other
people then the country absolutely could
not make progress whether you're talking
about Europe or Canada or Australia or
anywhere else you always have an
ever-increasing dynamic of smaller and
smaller numbers of people owning more
and more of the land and this is not new
was already discussed at lengthen and
depth by Aristotle Aristotle in ancient
Athens they already had this problem
they observed it many times and they
observed that they needed government
periodically to take land away from the
rich and give it to the poor or else
democracy would degenerate into
feudalism a small number of aristocrats
would own everything worth owning a few
powerful families would control the
whole of Athens or Sparta or whatever
that the city might be has already known
thousands of years ago this pattern so
on the one hand if you ever want
positive cultural change if you ever
want to move past the legacy of the Dark
Ages in Europe then you have to believe
in the government stepping in at some
point and putting an end to exactly what
the notre-dame cathedral represents and
exactly what it really
is no that doesn't mean the notre-dame
Cathedral has to be replaced with a
parking lot
the notre-dame Cathedral could be
replaced with a museum a museum that
really merits taxpayers finding
taxpayers dollars that really explores
and really examines what was wrong with
the Dark Ages and the legacy of the the
church that built the North American
theater all examines why people went on
these long tour images to see this piece
of wood this piece of wood that really
is a kind of religious fraud that they
imagined was you know part of the cross
that Jesus was hung on and and and the
the crazy rationalizations they made up
in their own minds for living in a
society where people were constantly
torturing one another to death in in the
name of this faith a religion that was
constantly at war with itself and
constantly war with the whole outside
world until one day in France there was
a revolution the people stood up and
said no more
that the power of the church would come
to an end okay this is the problem we're
already living in 2019 when when is the
power of the church
gonna come to an end in principle it may
sound evil to talk about the government
taking away private part of all the
government abrogating the right of
private properties over the government
abrogating the rights of religion what
what is the right of religion what is
the right of private property if the
right of private property is for the
rich to get richer is for aristocrats to
own land in perpetuity is for the class
of people in each generation who happen
to get wealthy to amass land ownership
and then pass it on to their descendants
forever and ever
uninterrupted then you you can just look
at the situation where now and look
ahead in the next 100 years and see very
clearly what that will do to the society
even if it's just at random than in each
generation a few people become multi
millionaires what impact that will have
okay and what will be the change in the
next 100 years
if the accumulated
the accumulated splendor even of the
Catholic Church if that never is
abrogated if that's never challenged if
that's never changed and if it's not
going to be the government then who it's
not the case that Starbucks can ever buy
the no TRADOC Cathedral this is not a
problem that the private sector can
intervene in or change it may sound cold
it may sound bleak it may sound
terrifying but the burning down of the
notre-dame Cathedral is an opportunity
for something positive to happen for
something better to replace it for some
kind of step forward some kind of
culture and political change for France
and it's terrifying for me to see
Emmanuel macron standing up without a
word of criticism from anyone not from
the professional internet atheists not
from the left-wing not from the right
one for him to stand up and say no
everything should be rebuilt exactly as
it was apparently a taxpayers expense
that's not clear who's gonna pay for it
that the money should be furnished so
that the notre-dame cathedral can remain
a symbol of France forever and ever and
ever that that's not the future of
France that's not the present of France
and that's not even the history of
France since you wrote your constitution
or since you wrote your first
constitution in the French Revolution
that's a very sad and and shameful thing
look guys just used to put this in in
perspective you know what what if there
was a fire in Toronto that burned down
the CN tower the CN tower was once the
tallest structure in the world it still
- what if there was a fire at random and
they say you know what now it's not
structurally sound
it would just cost millions of millions
of dollars to rebuild the CN tower in
downtown 0 CN tower has none of these
connotations it's not linked to the
history of slavery and feudalism and
Christianity it's not a piece of the one
true cross for Catholics to worship
there's none of these none of these
issues that you're just eight you know
what I think the really mature thing
would be
for the people to understand I'm say you
know what the CN tower was a symbol of
the City of Toronto for a certain period
of time you know what
now that period of time is over we can
do better we can do something new we can
have a new symbol of a new building you
know what let's let it go let's demolish
it let's take it down we can live with
other CN Tower the CN tower is not
really a symbol of the City of Toronto
now or what its gonna be or what's gonna
become you know what let's let's have
some detachment the CN towers is
supposed to be here okay might be hard
to do but I think that would actually be
bold political leadership and that would
show and and again you can you can
propose something better you can look at
the millions and perhaps billions of
dollars you need to rebuild the CN tower
so you know what we don't we need to
relive this ideal leftover from the
1970s you know what what our city is all
about it can be it can be something else
all right but in this case in France in
France the country that's committed to
secularism lace ETA to separation of
church and state what could be more
saddening than hearing that the
notre-dame Cathedral is supposed to be
the symbol for Paris the symbol for
France for the French nation not five
hundred years ago and not one thousand
years ago but now and in the future
forever and ever and ever and at
taxpayers expense this is the opposite
of a commitment to positive progress
this is a commitment to stasis and in
2019 apparently there was just no public
appetite for someone to stand up and
make a better suggestion people like to
disrespect my truth but the fact is that
you know my name is I don't know